A Functional Dependency describes a
relationship between attributes within a
single relation.
Functional dependency – In a given relation R, X and Y are attributes. Attribute Y is functionally
dependent on attribute X if each value of X determines exactly one value of Y.
Full Functional Dependency - In a given relation R, X and Y are attributes. Attribute Y
is fully functionally dependent on attribute X only if it is not functionally dependent
on sub-set of X where X is composite in nature.
Partial Functional Dependency –The FD (functional dependency) A->B happens to be
a partial dependency if B is functionally dependent on A, and also B can be determined
by any other proper subset of A.
Trivial Dependency -A Functional Dependency X ->Y is said to be trivial functional
dependency if y is a subset of X( Y ⊆X). In other words if R.H.S of some FD is the subset
of L.H.S of FD is called Trivial Functional Dependency.
Axioms: Armstrong’s axioms are a set of rules, that when applied repeatedly
generates a closure of functional dependencies. Refer Class notes.
Attribute Closure
The set of all those attributes which can be functionally determined from an attribute set is
called as closure of that attribute set.
Steps to find closure of an attribute set:
1. Add the attributes contained in the attribute set for which closure is being calculated
to the result set.
2. Recursively add the attributes to the result set which can be functionally determined
from the attributes already contained in the result set.
Example: Consider a relation R(A,B,C,D,E,F,G) with the functional dependencies
A->BC BC ->DE D->F CF ->G
Normalization
Normalization is a systematic approach of decomposing tables to eliminate data redundancy and undesirable
characteristics like Insertion, Update and Deletion anomalies.
▪ These would include two properties
o Lossless join property - which guarantees that the generation of spurious tuples will not occur.
o Dependency preservation property - This ensures that each functional dependency is represented in
some individual relation resulting after decomposition.
▪ Prime attribute - An attribute of relation schema R is called a prime attribute of R if it is a member
of some candidate key of R.
▪ Non-prime attribute - An attribute is called nonprime if it is not a prime attribute—that is, if it is
not a member of any candidate key.